Title: Satellites watch Hurricane Francine make landfall as a Category 2 storm in Louisiana (video)

The storm brought maximum sustained winds estimated close to 100 mph (155 km/hr). 
When you purchase through links on our site, we may earn an affiliate commission. Here’s how it works.
 Hurricane Francine, the sixth named storm of the Atlantic hurricane season, made landfall in Louisiana on Wednesday afternoon (Sept. 11) as a Category 2 storm. The highest sustained winds at landfall in the southern Louisiana Parish of Terrebonne approached 100 miles per hour (155 kilometers per hour) with reports of higher wind gusts.  Francine also brought a life-threatening storm surge to the coastline, and heavy rain triggered flooding across parts of the Gulf Coast. Thousands of people were told to evacuate ahead of the storm and hundreds of thousands of people were without power in Louisiana, Mississippi, and Alabama as of Thursday morning (Sept. 12)  Air Mass imagery via @NOAA's #GOESEast 🛰️ shows #Francine, now a depression, moving inland over the southeastern U.S. this morning. Heavy rainfall is spreading across Mississippi, Alabama, and the Florida panhandle. Latest advisories: https://t.co/wJGBXDcfEu pic.twitter.com/x0Eo6veFRZSeptember 12, 2024 The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)'s GOES-East satellite has been documenting the progression of the storm since it began to develop in the central tropical Atlantic at the end of August.  Francine strengthened into a tropical storm in the Gulf of Mexico on Sept. 9 and then a day later, on the climatological peak of hurricane season (Sept. 10), became the fourth hurricane of the Atlantic Season. Related: Satellites watch Tropical Storm Francine threaten Gulf Coast (video) Sep 11: Hurricane Francine rainbands continue to spread inland into southern Louisiana. Francine is moving toward the NE and is anticipated to make landfall in Louisiana within the warning area later this afternoon or this evening. Very dangerous wave heights to 33 ft ongoing. pic.twitter.com/m9EOTRiVt0September 11, 2024 Forecasters continue to use two of the instruments on the satellite to get the best picture of the storm, the Advanced Baseline Imager (ABI) and Geostationary Lightning Mapper (GLM). There are three different types of channels  —  visible, near-infrared, and infrared  —  that make up 16 total variations on the ABI.  Breaking space news, the latest updates on rocket launches, skywatching events and more! By utilizing the different wavelengths, forecasters can keep a watchful eye on hurricanes from space around the clock and obtain data to learn more about the storms' structure and intensity in near-real time. The GLM can also provide clues to the continuous changes in a hurricane's intensity and composition based on the amount of lightning strikes at a given moment or over a period of time.  Sept 10 - @NOAA WP-3D Orion #NOAA43 "Miss Piggy" is flying into TS #Francine to assess if it's intensifying into a hurricane. Data collected will refine intensity forecasts and support hurricane research. Visit https://t.co/3phpgKMZaS for the latest updates. #FlyNOAA pic.twitter.com/MVQfn5LX31September 10, 2024  —  2024 hurricane season should be busy, NOAA says  — Hurricane Beryl sets multiple records as 1st major storm of 2024 Atlantic season (video)  — How NOAA's Hurricane Hunter aircraft help satellites build a 'full picture of the storm' NOAA's Hurricane Hunter aircraft also relies on information provided by satellites for their missions to collect data on a storm. The information obtained on flights both into and around storms help forecasters have a better understanding of how intense storms are and provide other important information on their conditions and trajectories. Francine will continue to weaken now as it continues inland but will still pose threats of more flash and urban flooding Thursday (Sept. 12) across the Gulf Coast from Louisiana to the Florida Panhandle and then from the Lower Tennessee and Mississippi Valleys through Friday morning (Sept. 13). There will also be a threat of tornadoes as well embedded within the bands of the storm.  You can continue to find updates and details on any alerts for Francine on NOAA's National Hurricane Center website and through trusted local media outlets.  Join our Space Forums to keep talking space on the latest missions, night sky and more! And if you have a news tip, correction or comment, let us know at: community@space.com. Meredith is a regional Murrow award-winning Certified Broadcast Meteorologist and science/space correspondent. She most recently was a Freelance Meteorologist for NY 1 in New York City & the 19 First Alert Weather Team in Cleveland. A self-described "Rocket Girl," Meredith's personal and professional work has drawn recognition over the last decade, including the inaugural Valparaiso University Alumni Association First Decade Achievement Award, two special reports in News 12's Climate Special "Saving Our Shores" that won a Regional Edward R. Murrow Award, multiple Fair Media Council Folio & Press Club of Long Island awards for meteorology & reporting, and a Long Island Business News & NYC TV Week "40 Under 40" Award.
 Hot 'Salsa:' European satellite burns up in landmark controlled reentry (photo) Satellites watch Tropical Storm Francine threaten Gulf Coast (video) Sun fires off X-class solar flare, increasing aurora viewing chances into weekend Space is part of Future US Inc, an international media group and leading digital publisher. Visit our corporate site. ©
Future US, Inc. Full 7th Floor, 130 West 42nd Street,
New York,
NY 10036. 