Title: On This Day in Space! Sept. 13, 2007: Japan launches Kaguya moon mission

On Sept. 13, 2007, Japan launched the Kaguya spacecraft on a mission to the moon. 
When you purchase through links on our site, we may earn an affiliate commission. Here’s how it works.
 On Sept. 13, 2007, Japan launched the Kaguya spacecraft on a mission to the moon. Formally known as SELENE, which is short for SELenological and ENgineering Explorer, it was Japan's second moon mission. Kaguya launched from Tanegashima Space Center on a Japanese H-IIA rocket and looped around the Earth twice before heading to the moon. It carried 14 science instruments and two microsatellites to map the moon's surface and study its gravitational field.   — Target Moon: Japan's Kaguya Probe Set for Lunar Mission  — Japan Launches Kaguya Probe on Moon Mission  — Japan's Kaguya Probe Slams into the Moon  — Pictures Reveal Kaguya Moon Probe's Final Moments   After a 20-day journey, it arrived in lunar orbit. The mission included three spacecraft: a main orbiter, a small communications satellite, and a third small satellite to map the moon's gravitational field.  After about a year of lunar observations, the mission ended with a planned crash landing on the lunar surface.  Still not enough space? Don't forget to check out our Space Image of the Day, and on the weekends our Best Space Photos and Top Space News Stories of the week. Breaking space news, the latest updates on rocket launches, skywatching events and more! Join our Space Forums to keep talking space on the latest missions, night sky and more! And if you have a news tip, correction or comment, let us know at: community@space.com. Hanneke Weitering is a multimedia journalist in the Pacific Northwest reporting on the future of aviation at FutureFlight.aero and Aviation International News and was previously the Editor for Spaceflight and Astronomy news here at Space.com. As an editor with over 10 years of experience in science journalism she has previously written for Scholastic Classroom Magazines, MedPage Today and The Joint Institute for Computational Sciences at Oak Ridge National Laboratory. After studying physics at the University of Tennessee in her hometown of Knoxville, she earned her graduate degree in Science, Health and Environmental Reporting (SHERP) from New York University. Hanneke joined the Space.com team in 2016 as a staff writer and producer, covering topics including spaceflight and astronomy. She currently lives in Seattle, home of the Space Needle, with her cat and two snakes. In her spare time, Hanneke enjoys exploring the Rocky Mountains, basking in nature and looking for dark skies to gaze at the cosmos.  SpaceX's Starship won't be licensed to fly again until late November, FAA says SpaceX launches 5 giant BlueBird smartphone satellites for AST SpaceMobile, lands rocket (video) Boeing’s Starliner astronauts speak publicly today for 1st time in 2 months: Watch it live Space is part of Future US Inc, an international media group and leading digital publisher. Visit our corporate site. ©
Future US, Inc. Full 7th Floor, 130 West 42nd Street,
New York,
NY 10036. 