Title: I Tried 23 Non-Alcoholic Beers to Find the Best Ones I'd Happily Drink Any Day

 We independently evaluate all of our recommendations. If you click on links we provide, we may receive compensation.
 I found great options including hazy IPAs, dark stouts, and crisp lagers. Serious Eats / Dera Burreson The non-alcoholic beer market is booming. We are particularly fond of Best Day’s Kölsch, which represents the easy-drinking style of the brew quite well. If you're a hop-head, we also liked Sam Adams Just the Haze.  Like many Americans of a certain age, my early experiences with beer revolved around the inexpensive, readily available varieties found in convenience stores. Then, I left Florida for Portland, Oregon, in the mid-1980s and fell into a burgeoning craft beer revolution. I was shocked that beer existed in so many nuanced forms rather than the fairly homogenous lager spectrum I’d experienced. Not too long after, one of my friends went sober and rewarded themselves for their newfound obsession of doing 1,000 sit-ups a day with a non-alcoholic (NA) beer or two. It was the same big-brand lager with even less flavor—basically water— and I wondered why they would punish themselves with such a horrible reward.
  Like the craft beer industry, the non-alcoholic beer market has since evolved, allowing beer drinkers to crack open a well-crafted beer—without the alcohol. Well, mostly; non-alcoholic beer may legally contain up to 0.5% alcohol by volume (ABV), which is negligible but good to note for those totally teetotaling. To see where the current market offerings lie, I put my palate to work and tasted 23 top-rated non-alcoholic beers with wide distribution in the US. Here are my 19 favorites from that selection.
 Serious Eats / Dera Burreson Serious Eats / Dera Burreson  Non-alcoholic or low-alcohol beer is an ancient beverage, with origins possibly dating to 5,000 BCE. If we fast-forward to Europe during the Middle Ages, “small beer”—typically with an ABV of 2 to 3%—became popular.
  Small beer gained popularity in the US alongside the temperance movement. Major brewers such as Anheuser-Busch, Pabst, Miller, and Coors brewed “near beer" containing 0.5% ABV, during Prohibition both to provide a non-alcoholic beverage and to survive the Volstead Act. These beers faded as Prohibition ended, but renewed interest swayed major brewers to bring NA products to market in the 1990s.
  Personal tastes vary, but many of these early non-alcoholic brews weren’t as rich and complex as the originals. They were the diner coffee of the beer world. However, the changing consumer tastes that drove the craft beer industry inevitably led to innovation in the non-alcoholic beer scene too.
 Serious Eats / Dera Burreson  Mindfulness, intentionality, and health and wellness are some of the major drivers for grabbing an NA beer versus its alcoholic counterpart. There are also generational preferences and a new era of online accountability in play. Drinking habits between generations have changed, too. To get further into these ideas, I spoke with Chris Furnari, senior communications manager at Athletic Brewing Company, as well as John Walker, chief product officer and co-founder of the non-alcoholic brewing brand. I also chatted with mindful drinking expert and founder of Positive Damage, Inc., Derek Brown. 
  Brown explains that the Boomer and Silent generations had a mindset that leaned more toward staying home and hosting dinner parties, with the occasional big night out. “But it was never this perpetual youth that Gen X seems to embody,” he says, regarding Gen X’s preference for going out. “I have friends who are anywhere between 40 and 60 or so, going out to see bands every single weekend."
  What’s changed is what they’re drinking when they’re out. Instead of going hard like they did in their younger years, Xers may have one good drink or no alcohol at all. Millennials and Gen Z are statistically drinking less, too, with Millennials drinking less than Gen X, and Gen Z drinking another 20% less than Millennials. Younger drinkers value quality over quantity and may order one well-made alcoholic drink before switching to something non-alcoholic. The reasons vary, but as I mentioned, many want to make healthier decisions about what they imbibe or just don't want to rely on a buzz to socialize.
  The short of it: Most non-alcoholic beer does have a tiny bit of alcohol unless it’s explicitly labeled “alcohol free” per the Code of Federal Regulations. So the question is, is non-alcoholic beer for everyone, given that most of it still contains alcohol? Even people in recovery? Brown is quite diplomatic in explaining that everyone’s recovery journey is personal and that doing what is comfortable for them is essential. “I think that it really depends on the person, because the nature of memory and the things that propel us to think about alcohol and to make us want to drink or not are not always uniform,” he says. “Some people can't even walk into a bar, right? Some people can walk into a bar and share a non-alcoholic beer. Some people in their long-term recovery might even find eventually…they can return to drinking alcohol. It’s not something I recommend, just something that happens.” 
  It’s safe to say that brewing technology has significantly changed over the past thousand years. New methodologies constantly evolve, and older technologies find new uses. “Who thought that we'd be cooking chicken in a plastic bag and a 150-degree bath for two hours 20 years ago?” Walker says. The same innovative mentality goes for brewing non-alcoholic beer.
  Non-alcoholic beer typically (we’ll get to the exceptions, I promise) starts as the full-strength version with the alcohol removed after brewing. The two most common methods to remove the alcohol are vacuum distillation and reverse osmosis. Put simply, distilling the beer under lower pressure drops the boiling point of ethanol, which evaporates before the flavors and volatile compounds in the beer do. Reverse osmosis passes the beer through a membrane that removes the alcohol (and some water) while preventing the larger molecules of the flavor compounds from doing the same. Cold fermentation is another way of controlling the alcohol content. In this instance, the beer is brewed at temperatures at or below 60°F. That lower temperature prevents the yeast from producing ethanol, resulting in a beer with very low to no alcohol content. There are also yeast strains that only ferment simple sugars like sucrose, glucose, and fructose, leaving complex sugars like maltose untouched, resulting in a low-alcohol beer with higher residual sugar in the brew.
 Serious Eats / Dera Burreson  It’s never been easier to find a very drinkable version of your favorite style that forgoes the alcohol. If you want a beer that truly has no alcohol in it, look for the “alcohol free” label, which per the Code of Federal Regulations, may only be used on “malt beverages containing no alcohol. No tolerances are permitted for ‘alcohol free’ malt beverages.” Beyond that, the beer should get pretty darn close to replicating the style it's mimicking, and it shouldn't have any off flavors (read: sulfurous stink or unpleasant dankness).
  For those who want the classic “light beer” flavor without the alcohol, Athletic Lite is a great place to start. Walker explained that Athletic’s goal is to appeal to a broad sector of beer drinkers, not just beer nerds, and this is an excellent representation of those efforts. It’s a clean-drinking, crisp beer with a slight lemon-lime flavor and very light maltiness that lays easy on the palate.
  Bravus’ light beer offering is a bit more complex than the average light beer but just as easy to drink. It’s a crisp, clean sip that leads with a bit of tart sweetness before settling into a biscuity maltiness.
  Scene stalwarts Sierra Nevada Brewing Co. have moved into the non-alcoholic space. This easy-drinking golden ale is an excellent representation of the style in a non-alcoholic form. This beer starts with restrained citrus and pine hop notes that transition to a smooth maltiness, finishing with clean, hoppy bitterness and a lingering hint of citrus.
  Samuel Adams isn’t a brewery to be left behind, and this offering is a great example of a golden ale. A classic golden is a lager-adjacent beer with a light but full malty flavor and mild hoppy tartness, and this beer fits that picture. It leads with floral and kiwi hop notes and moves into a medium malt body that finishes with a light, crisp, melony flavor.
  IPAs rule the craft beer world, so it’s only natural that the style gets equal time in all its forms in the non-alcoholic space. Best Day’s Hazy IPA shows the best aspects of the style, with fruity hops and notes of pine and grapefruit leading the way. This hop bomb is followed by a gentle malt fullness and light sweetness, finishing with a slightly bitter melon note.
  Just the Haze by Samuel Adams is another great representation of the hazy New England-style IPA. Grapefruit, pineapple, and melon on the nose lead this full-bodied but not significantly malty ale that finishes with crisp, hoppy notes. It's rich and heady but without that smoothie-like heaviness that a hazy New England IPA can possess.
  The difference between a hazy and juicy IPA is nebulous, at best. The best explanation sounds like a question on a college-prep test: not all hazy IPAs are juicy, and not all juicy IPAs are hazy. I’m too tired to solve for X in that equation, but I’ll say this offering from Untitled Art lives up to the name. I got a tropical fruity, hard candy sweetness that followed a thick, heady hop nose that’s classic for an IPA. The maltiness was well-balanced, and lingering hints of vanilla stood out above the other flavors.
  Bravus’ West Coast IPA is a fairly restrained beer for such a “big” style. Citrus, pine, and floral hop notes hit your nose immediately, but the medium body from the malt mellows those tones without lingering sweetness, followed by a clean finish.
  Run Wild is a good candidate for those who want to imbibe a few (or more) IPAs. It drinks like a muted West Coast style, with plenty of piney, citrusy hops and a mild tropical fruit nose. Subtle medium maltiness gives just enough body to complement the hoppiness, and the beer ends with a crisp, hoppy aftertaste.
  I’ve had mixed feelings about Peroni. I hated it when I was younger, but it seems there’s been a change in my palate since then—I quite enjoy it now. Peroni makes a crisp, clean, classic lager, and Nastro Azzurro is no different from its alcoholic counterpart. Try it with Neapolitan-style pizza or a light pasta dish.
  Italian Pils is a hoppier version of the classic Pilsner.  Untitled Art’s offering has dominant citrus and floral hoppy bitterness that rides on top of a crisp Italian Pilsner body and finish.
  I have no ground to stand on when saying this, but I think the first folks to make session IPAs drew from the crisp lightness of a classic Kölsch for inspiration. A Kölsch is a “drink it all afternoon” type of beer, and Best Day’s version serves that idea well. It’s got a medium caramel maltiness without a “feedbaggy” aftertaste and a slightly citrusy hoppiness that finishes clean without weighing you down. It's one of commerce editor Grace Kelly's favorites. "It's incredibly refreshing when chilled, and tastes just like a non, non-alcoholic Kolsch, with a tinge of bitterness on the finish," she says.
  Athletic is serious about providing a beer for every taste. This Mexican-style copper is for fans of Negra Modelo and other Mexican lagers. It’s a great beach beer with lightly toasted malt and a bready, wheaty body complimented by spicy floral notes.
  There’s not a lot I can say about Guinness 0. If you like the alcoholic version (which I do), you will not notice much of a difference in this alcohol-free version of its classic stout, with notes of bitter chocolate and coffee, a full body, and a creamy head. It's perhaps slightly more watery than the original, but that's me trying to find a bone to pick.
  I’d place Bravus’ Peanut Butter Dark as straddling the line between a stout and a porter when considering its mouth-coating body. It’s creamy on the tongue, with light touches of dark malt that provide a chocolatey flavor, accented by strong yet balanced notes of roasted peanuts and hazelnuts. This beer isn’t a pastry stout by any standards—there’s deep maltiness that never veers into the sweet realm.
  Given the popularity of fruited sour ales, it only makes sense that someone would make a non-alcoholic version. It’s a little thick on the tongue for a sour, giving off fruit juice vibes, but it’s nicely carbonated and strikes a nice balance between sweet and tart, although it’s a little light on the sourness for my taste buds.
  Ginger and yuzu sit nicely on top of this wheat beer. It makes a perfect hot afternoon post-yardwork brew that’s utterly refreshing. Pair it with some brats off the grill and a side of elotes for a fantastic summer meal. This is a rotational release, which means it's only available for a limited time.
  Pale malt makes a perfect light backbone for a light blonde ale. The strawberry flavor is noticeable but comes quite short of cloying or dominating. Packaging the malt and strawberry together, I got strong impressions of strawberry shortcake—cream and all. It is a limited release.
  Golden ales are well represented in the non-alcoholic space, and this offering from Athletic is good, with citrus aromas and finish and an earthy, vaguely spicy body. It's also has its gluten removed. That said, the brand notes on its website: "This product is fermented from grains containing gluten and crafted to remove gluten. The gluten content of this product cannot be verified, and this product may contain gluten."
 The Rise of Non-Alcoholic Beer: From Near Beer to Craft. Alcohol Professor. Amdt18.5 Volstead Act. Constitution.Congress.gov Ludmir C. Why GenZ is drinking less and what this means for the alcohol industry. Forbes. ECFR :: 27 CFR chapter I subchapter A -- alcohol. Ecfr.gov.