Title: SpaceX's private Polaris Dawn astronauts beam photos to Earth using Starlink satellites

'Sent to you from space over a beam of Starlink laser light.' 
When you purchase through links on our site, we may earn an affiliate commission. Here’s how it works.
 The private Polaris Dawn astronauts keep notching milestones in Earth orbit. The four-person Polaris Dawn mission launched aboard a SpaceX Crew Dragon capsule early Tuesday morning (Sept. 10). Later that day, the astronauts got farther from Earth — 870 miles (1,400.7 kilometers) — than any crewed mission since the Apollo era.  Polaris Dawn next pulled off the first-ever private spacewalk on Thursday (Sept. 12), then followed up that historic achievement with one in the communications sphere— posting on X from orbit for the first time using SpaceX's Starlink broadband satellites.  "Hello Earth — We are so grateful for all the support! Please enjoy two recent photos from our mission and stay tuned for our next message. Sent to you from space over a beam of Starlink laser light — Crew of Polaris Dawn," reads the X post, which was published on Thursday afternoon by the Polaris Program, a three-mission effort organized and funded by billionaire tech entrepreneur Jared Isaacman. One of the two photos shows the four Polaris Dawn astronauts — commander Isaacman, pilot Scott "Kidd" Poteet and mission specialists Sarah Gillis and Anna Menon — inside their capsule, which is named Resilience. The second is a beauty shot of Earth's brilliant blue limb against the blackness of space. Related: SpaceX Polaris Dawn astronauts perform historic 1st private spacewalk in orbit (video) — Polaris Dawn mission: Meet the crew taking 1st commercial spacewalk —  SpaceX Polaris Dawn private spacewalk mission: Live updates —  How SpaceX's private Polaris Dawn astronauts will attempt the 1st-ever 'all-civilian' spacewalk Polaris Dawn is a free flyer; unlike the astronaut missions that SpaceX conducts for NASA, it won't link up with the International Space Station. Polaris Dawn is expected to last about five days, meaning it will likely come back to Earth sometime this weekend. Breaking space news, the latest updates on rocket launches, skywatching events and more! The pioneering private flight is the second orbital jaunt for Isaacman, who also funded and commanded the four-person Inspiration4 mission in September 2021.  And Isaacman has two more SpaceX missions lined up — the second and third flights in the Polaris Program. Not much is known about either one at this point, though Isaacman has said that Polaris' Flight 3 will be the first crewed mission of Starship, the giant rocket that SpaceX is developing to help humanity settle the moon and Mars. Join our Space Forums to keep talking space on the latest missions, night sky and more! And if you have a news tip, correction or comment, let us know at: community@space.com. Michael Wall is a Senior Space Writer with Space.com and joined the team in 2010. He primarily covers exoplanets, spaceflight and military space, but has been known to dabble in the space art beat. His book about the search for alien life, "Out There," was published on Nov. 13, 2018. Before becoming a science writer, Michael worked as a herpetologist and wildlife biologist. He has a Ph.D. in evolutionary biology from the University of Sydney, Australia, a bachelor's degree from the University of Arizona, and a graduate certificate in science writing from the University of California, Santa Cruz. To find out what his latest project is, you can follow Michael on Twitter. Boeing’s Starliner astronauts speak publicly today for 1st time in 2 months: Watch it live SpaceX's private Polaris Dawn astronauts talk US flag and kids' books from orbit on historic spaceflight (videos) Black hole or neutron star? Gravitational wave 'chirps' can tell us what becomes of dying stars Space is part of Future US Inc, an international media group and leading digital publisher. Visit our corporate site. ©
Future US, Inc. Full 7th Floor, 130 West 42nd Street,
New York,
NY 10036. 