Title: SpaceX Polaris Dawn private spacewalk mission: Live updates


When you purchase through links on our site, we may earn an affiliate commission. Here’s how it works.
 SpaceX's Polaris Dawn mission successfully launched American billionaire Jared Isaacman and three others into orbit on Sept. 10 on a five-day flight to attempt the world's first private spacewalk. The mission is the first of three Polaris Program spaceflights with SpaceX, and the second personally financed by Isaacman. The spacewalk occurred on Thursday, Sept. 12. The historic mission launched on a Falcon 9 rocket and the Crew Dragon capsule Resilience, making its third flight. Isaacman is mission commander; with US Air Force Lt. Col (retired) Scott "Kidd" Poteet as pilot; Sarah Gillis, SpaceX lead space operations engineer for astronaut training, as mission specialist; and Anna Menon, SpaceX lead operations engineer for crew operations development, as mission specialist and medical officer. Spacewalk Replay!| Meet the Crew | Polaris Dawn | Polaris Program |  Polaris Dawn released a new music video from space this morning, hours after beaming home photos from orbit using Starlink satellites.  Polaris Dawn, a five-day private mission, continues to notch milestones under its belt. After breaking an altitude record set in 1966 for highest orbital crewed flight and helping break the record for most humans in orbit, the Polaris Dawn astronauts conducted the world's first commercial spacewalk on Thursday (Sept. 12). Later that day, the quartet beamed home photos using laser connections with SpaceX's Starlink satellites. And this morning (Sept. 13,) the crew released a music video from space that featured Polaris Dawn astronaut Sarah Gillis playing violin from inside the mission's Crew Dragon spacecraft. Read more: Polaris Dawn astronaut plays 'Star Wars' song in music video beamed from space (video)  "EVA operations complete." Following a series of leak checks inside the Polaris Dawn Crew Dragon Resilience, the repressurization of the spacecraft is complete. With full pressure restored to the cabin, the Polaris Dawn extravehicular activity (EVA) is concluded.  According to metrics from astronomer and space activity tracker Jonathan McDowell, the total "spacewalk time," today was 33min 25s. "The spacewalk time using my 5kPa rule was 33min 25s. The hatch open/close time was about 26m 40s. Isaacman was outside hatch for 7 min 56m; Gillis for about 7m15s," he wrote in a post on X. From the beginning of depressurization of Dragon's cabin to the "operations copmlete" call ending the EVA, total ellapsed time was 1 hour and 46 minutes, ending at 7:58 am ET. Read more: SpaceX Polaris Dawn astronauts perform historic 1st private spacewalk in orbit (video)  With the Polaris Dawn crew secured back inside their Crew Dragon Resilience spacecraft, the forward hatch has been closed and repressurization of the spacecraft begun. The full repressurization of Dragon will take place in two stages, with varying rates of the addition of nitrogen to raise initial pressures, followed by a mixture of oxygen to complete the spacecraft's interior atmosphere. The process is expected to take about 50 minutes.  After several minutes of utilizing Dragon's Skywalker handrail aide to test the mobility of SpaceX's new extravehicular activity (EVA) suit, Polaris Dawn mission specialist Sarah Gillis is back inside the spacecraft to prepare to close the hatch and conclude the team's EVA.   With mission commander Jared Isaacman safely back inside the Crew Dragon Resilience and the spacecraft's atitude adjusted slightly, mission specialist Sarah Gillis, reffered to during the extravehicular activity (EVA) as "EV2" moved for her turn to egress the spacecraft. As Isaacman did, Gillis will test out specific movements and functionalilities of SpaceX's EVA suit. Prior to exiting, Gillis noted some "buldging" in some of the Dragon hatch seals, remarked as "expected" by SpaceX commentators. The livestream of this morning's spacwalk is available at the top of this page, SpaceX's X account, or simulcast on the Space.com YouTube Channel.  With the Polaris Dawn EVA underway, mission commander Jared Isaacman has exited the spacecraft, using SpaceX's Skywalker mobility platform to secure himself as he floats in the vacuum of space.  With their suits fully pressurized and the Crew Dragon cabin vented down to vacuum, the Polaris Dawn crew was given the green light top open the forward hatch of their spacecraft.  Presently, mission commander Jared Isaacman, refferred to during the EVA as "EV1," followed by mission specialist Sarah Gillish, "EV2," will take turn egressing the spacecraft, utilizing SpaceX's novel "Skywalker" mobility aide to exit Dragon's forward hatch. Unlike the extravehicular activity (EVA) suits used on the International Space Station (ISS), SpaceX's EVA suits lack the life support systems needed to operate without an umbilical. As such, Isaacman and Gillis are securred with a 12-foot tether, which provides a steady flow of oxygen, communications lines and a safety link securing them to the spacecraft as they perform EVA operations. The livestream of this morning's spacwalk is available at the top of this page, SpaceX's X account, or simulcast on the Space.com YouTube Channel.  "SpaceX is go for EVA operations." "EV1 is go." "EV2 is go." "Support 1 is go." "Support 2 is go." The Polaris Dawn spacwalk has begun at 3:12 a.m. PDT. The crew has completed their suit checks, confirmed seals, heads-up display functionality, and a undergone a seat rotation to allow for increased mobility during the extravehicular activity (EVA). With their suits switched to a flow of pure oxygen, the EVA has officially begun. Shortly, Isaacman and Gillis will exit Dragon in series to complete the function and mobility tests of SpaceX's new spacesuits.  This is the first commercial spacewalk ever performed, and the first time as many as four astronauts have donned spacesuits and all been simultaneously exposed to the vacuum of space. The livestream is available at the top of this page, SpaceX's X account, or simulcast on the Space.com YouTube Channel.  Following an extended prebreathe procedure, the Polaris Dawn crew has begun donning their suits in preparation of switching to a full oxygen flow before a "go," "no-go" poll for leak checks and the opening of Dragon's forward hatch. Dragon will reposition itself so its trunk is facing the sun in order to regulate temperatures and communications during the spacewalk, during which mission commander Jared Isaacman and mission specialist Sarah Gillis will take turns exiting Dragon to test the mobility of the SpaceX extravehicular activity (EVA) spacesuit. The livestream is available at the top of this page, SpaceX's X account, or simulcast on the Space.com YouTube Channel.  SpaceX has begun the livestream of the Polaris Dawn spacewalk. The activity is scheduled to begin at 5:58 a.m. ET. You can watch the spacewalk live online via SpaceX's X account, and it will be simulcast at the top of this page and on the Space.com YouTube Channel. The spacewalk, which will be see Polaris Dawn commander Jared Isaacman and mission specialist Sarah Gillis both exit the Dragon spacecraft. The entire procedure, from decompression of the cabin to represurization is expected to take about two hours.  SpaceX has updated the time of the Polaris Dawn spacewalk to Thursday, September 12 at 5:58 a.m. ET. If needed, a backup opportunity is available on Friday, September 13.  The spacewalk, which will be conducted by Polaris Dawn commander Jared Isaacman and mission specialist Sarah Gillis,  You can watch the spacewalk live online via SpaceX's X account, and it will be simulcast at the top of this page and on the Space.com YouTube Channel. The livestream will begin about one hour before the spacewalk begins.  The entire spacewalk should last about two hours, with all four Polaris Dawn astronauts donning their SpaceX spacesuits. During that time, the crew will depressurize their Dragon capsule so Isaacman and Gillis can perch themselves halfway outside Dragon's hatch on a "mobility aid" SpaceX calls its Skywalker. They are expected to spent about 15 minutes actually positioned partially outside the hatch.   SpaceX is just hours away from attempting the world's first private spacewalk with the Polaris Dawn.  The spacewalk, which will be conducted by Polaris Dawn commander Jared Isaacman and mission specialist Sarah Gillis, is scheduled to begin at 2:23 a.m. EDT (0623 GMT) on Thursday, Sept. 12, which is tomorrow! You can watch the spacewalk live online via SpaceX's X account, and it will be simulcast at the top of this page and on the Space.com YouTube Channel. The livestream will begin about one hour before the spacewalk begins.  The entire spacewalk should last about two hours, with all four Polaris Dawn astronauts donning their SpaceX spacesuits. During that time, the crew will depressurize their Dragon capsule so Isaacman and Gillis can perch themselves halfway outside Dragon's hatch on a "mobility aid" SpaceX calls its Skywalker. They are expected to spent about 15 minutes actually positioned partially outside the hatch.  Tune in on Thursday! As SpaceX says, "Excitement guaranteed!" SpaceX reports that its Polaris Dawn Dragon spacecraft has successfully lowered its orbit today, executing a series of four thruster maneuvers to reach an orbit that ranges between 121 miles (195 kilometers) at its lowest point and 458 miles (737 km) at its highest point. This is the orbit the Polaris Dawn crew will use during its highly anticipated private spacewalk on Thursday. In anticipation of that historic first private spacewalk, SpaceX has released an excellent video on how it built its new spacewalk spacesuit and you can check it our in our story.

NASA has also detailed the science experiments it has aboard Polaris Dawn as part of the crew's science mission. All lowering burns are now complete and Dragon is orbiting Earth at ~195 x 737 kmSeptember 11, 2024  Kisses from Space by Anna Menon, Keri Vesak, $19.99 now $15.99 at Amazon. SpaceX lead operations engineer Anna Menon's Kisses From Space, published by Random House, will fly to space with Menon on the Polaris Dawn mission. Proceeds from the book will help support St. Jude Children's Research Hospital. Flight Day 2 of SpaceX's Polaris Dawn mission is here and the private spaceflight backed by billionaire Jared Isaacman has already set a new record.  On Tuesday, Sept. 10, the crew's Dragon capsule Resilience reached the highest orbital altitude of the flight, a distance of about 870 miles (1,400.7 kilometers). The distance is the farthest from Earth humans have flown since NASA's Apollo 17 moon landing mission in 1972, and the highest Earth orbit by a crewed spacecraft since NASA's Gemini 11 mission in 1966.  That was on day one of the mission. Today, the crew will continue its 48-hour pre-breathing work ahead of a historic first private spacewalk on Thursday (Sept. 12).  Polaris Dawn mission specialist Anna Menon, a SpaceX lead operations engineer , is expected to read her children's book "Kisses from Space" from Dragon today as part of a fundraiser for St. Jude Children's Research Hospital.  The world's first all-civilian spacewalk is only two days away. Polaris Dawn will attempt its historic spacewalk on Thursday (Sept. 12) at 2:23 a.m. ET (0623 GMT), SpaceX wrote in a mission description on its website. During the spacewalk (also known as an extravehicular activity, or EVA), Polaris Dawn crewmembers Jared Isaacman and Sarah Gillis will exit their fully depressurized Crew Dragon spacecraft in specially-designed SpaceX spacesuits. It will be the first-ever spacewalk by private astronauts. You can watch it live here when the time comes, courtesy of SpaceX.  Read more: How SpaceX's historic Polaris Dawn private spacewalk will work  SpaceX's private Polaris Dawn mission is underway. After a stunning predawn launch, the four crewmembers of Polaris Dawn are preparing for their historic first all-civilian spacewalk. "Dragon will initiate a two-day pre-breathe process to prepare the crew for their upcoming spacewalk on Thursday, Sept. 12" SpaceX posted on X (formerly Twitter). According to the European Space Agency, this procedure involves astronauts breathing in specific gas mixtures, usually pure oxygen, to remove nitrogen from their bloodstreams in order to lower the risk of decompression sicknesses.  The Polaris Dawn crew's Dragon spacecraft has separated from its Falcon 9 second stage. The crew is now in orbit. Read our wrap story on the launch with amazing video. "We wouldn't be on this journey without all 14,000 of you back home and everyone else cheering us on," the mission's billionaire commander Jared Isaacman radioed to SpaceX's mission control center. "We appreciate it. We're gonna get to work now." Isaacman and his crew now begin a five-day mission that will attempt the world's first private spacewalk on Thursday, Sept. 12. It will also attempt to fly on the highest human spaceflight since Apollo 17 in 1972 and make the highest orbit with a space capsule, something not done since NASA's Gemini era.  Near the end of the mission, Polaris Dawn will attempt to demonstrate space-to-space Starlink internet on their Dragon capsule. They will also perform a series of experiments for researchers on Earth. The mission is also raising funds for St. Jude Children's Research Hospital to find treatments for pediatric cancers.  Flying with Isaacman on the mission are pilot Scott "Kidd" Poteet, and mission specialists Sarah Gillis and Anna Menon, both SpaceX employees and now the company's first astronauts.  SpaceX's webcast has ended for now. We'll post daily updates on the mission here as available, including information on Thursday's spacewalk attempt. Touchdown! SpaceX's Polaris Dawn Falcon 9 1st stage has successfully landed on the drone ship Just Read The Instructions in the Atlantic. Meanwhile, the upper stage has shut down. Dragon is in its initial orbit. The SpaceX crowd goes wild. The Falcon 9 rocket's first stage booster has performed its entry burn as the second stage continues its ascent into orbit with the Polaris Dawn astronauts aboard Dragon.  The Falcon 9 booster will attempt to land on SpaceX's drone ship Just Read The Instructions in the Atlantic Ocean. The Polaris Dawn Falcon 9 rocket has separated its first stage for the return to Earth as the upper stage continues powering upward carrying the Polaris Dawn astronauts toward orbit.  This is the fourth flight of the Falcon 9 booster and third flight of the Dragon capsule.  Liftoff! SpaceX's Falcon 9 rocket launches the private Polaris Dawn mission on a five-day trip to make the world's first commercial spacewalk.  Aboard the rocket are commander Jared Isaacman, pilot Kitt Poteet, and mission specialists Sarah Gillis and Anna Menon.  It will take about 9 minutes for the rocket to reach low-Earth orbit.  SpaceX's Falcon 9 rocket carrying the Polaris Dawn astronauts on the Crew Dragon Resilience is just 5 minutes from liftoff. The spacecraft is shifting to internal power for launch as fueling nears completion.  The strongback support on the Falcon 9 rocket has retracted.  The four Polaris Dawn astronauts now in their last few minutes on Earth before launching into space on a SpaceX Falcon 9 rocket.  SpaceX has begun fueling the rocket's second stage with its liquid oxygen propellant as fuel loading continues.   The bridge-like Crew Access Arm has been retracted clear of the Falcon 9 rocket ahead of the Polaris Dawn astronaut launch. The four astronauts inside the Crew Dragon atop the rocket have closed and locked their spacesuit visors for launch. SpaceX has armed the launch escape system on the Crew Dragon spacecraft, which will pull the capsule free of its rocket in case of an emergency during launch. SpaceX reports there's now only a 20% chance of weather violations, so that's an 80% chance of good weather for launch. Polaris Dawn mission specialist Sarah Gillis cheered when she heard the news of good launch weather while pilot Scott "Kidd" Poteet appeared to move his hands in a makeshift dance while strapped into his seat to celebrate. Liftoff on track now for 5:23 a.m. ET. SpaceX is now less than 1 hour from its next launch attempt. The weather outlook has improved for SpaceX's private Polaris Dawn launch at 5:23 a.m. ET, SpaceX's weather There is now only a 35% chance of bad weather, a marked improvement from the 60% earlier in the window.  "Things are looking a little more optimistic than they were an hour or so ago," SpaceX Falcon 9 principal integration engineer John Insprucker said. With SpaceX now aiming for a 5:23 a.m. EDT (0923 GMT) launch for Polaris Dawn, the four astronauts have been returned into launch position after getting a brief break to rest during the waive off from their first launch attempt. 

SpaceX's crew seats can rotate up and down so that crews can get seated and strapped in easily, then they rotate up into a horizontal launch position for liftoff.  SpaceX has decided to skip the 1st launch window for tonight's Polaris Dawn launch and is now targeting a liftoff at 5:23 a.m. EDT (0923 GMT).  The company's launch weather officer decided that conditions to launch may be better at the second of the three launch windows, as the range was No-Go for weather for the 3:38 am ET attempt. SpaceX also has a 3rd launch option at 7:09 a.m. EDT (1109 GMT), if needed. SpaceX is now about 1 hour away from the launch of its Polaris Dawn launch at 3:38 a.m. EDT (0738 GMT).  So far, the countdown has continued to go smoothly, though SpaceX continues to watch weather conditions for its planned liftoff. The company has two other potential launch times, at 5:23 a.m. EDT and 7:09 a.m. EDT, in which to try and launch the mission.  SpaceX reports that it is tracking some rain near the launch pad and launch controllers will wait on a final decision for the weather until the T-50 minute mark.  SpaceX has a great video look at how it developed its new spacewalk-worthy spacesuits, as well as its "Skywalker" mobility aid - sleek rail Isaacman can use to help position himself while poking out of the Dragon hatch on his spacewalk. Check it out! Learn how SpaceX designed and prepared the Polaris Dawn crew for the first commercial spacewalk pic.twitter.com/HRQlKPs8ioSeptember 10, 2024  SpaceX is now just under two hours away from the 3:38 a.m. EDT launch of the private Polaris Dawn mission, with weather still posing a concern.  So far, the launch countdown appears to have gone smoothly, though SpaceX's video livestream (which the company is streaming exclusively on X) is experiencing repeatedly buffering and stalling, interrupting live views of the launch.  SpaceX reports that the side hatch of the Crew Dragon Resilience has been closed for launch as the pad crew prepares to leave the launch site.  SpaceX's close-out crew has completed its spacesuit checks for the Polaris Dawn astronauts and reports four good suits. The pad crew will soon close the side hatch of the Dragon capsule, sealing the Polaris Dawn astronauts inside for launch.  The four Polaris Dawn astronauts are now in launch position, with their seats rotated back so their in a reclined position for liftoff. SpaceX reports the Falcon 9, Dragon spacecraft and the Polaris Dawn crew are all go for launch, with only the weather posing a concern for launch tonight. Suit leak checks are underway.  The four Polaris Dawn astronauts are entering their Dragon spacecraft, called Resilience, to prepare for tonight's launch at 3:38 a.m. EDT (0738 GMT).  SpaceX operations leads Sarah Gillis and Anna Menon were the first to board the spacecraft as mission specialists, with pilot Scott "Kidd" Poteet and the commander Jared Isaacman following shortly after. Isaacman is financing the Polaris Dawn mission and is making his second spaceflight on the Dragon Resiliance after 2021's Inspiration4 mission, which he also financed. This will be the third flight of the Crew Dragon Resilience, and the fourth flight of its Falcon 9 rocket.   The four private astronauts of SpaceX's Polaris Dawn mission have reached their launch pad at NASA's Pad 39A of the Kennedy Space Center after a brief walkout of the company's nearby operations building, where they showed off their new spacesuits designed for both launch and the brief spacewalk that will be attempted on this mission.  The crew is commanded by American billionaire Jared Isaacman, with pilot Kid Poteet and mission specialists Anna Menon and Sarah Gillis.  SpaceX's livestream for the Polaris Dawn launch is live on X and you can watch it in the video feed at the top of this page.  The four Polaris Dawn astronauts are currently suiting up in their SpaceX spacesuits and will soon walk out to the waiting Tesla cars that will drive them to their launch site at NASA's Pad 39A at the nearby Kennedy Space Center. John Insprucker, SpaceX's Falcon 9 principal integration engineer, says the Falcon 9 and Dragon are ready to go, but weather is still 60% No-Go for launch conditions, as well as for splashdown conditions.  SpaceX has a four-hour launch window for today's launch, with opportunities to liftoff at 3:38 a.m. EDT, 5:23 a.m. EDT or 7:09 a.m. EDT.  SpaceX is officially "go" to attempt tonight's planned launch of the private Polaris Dawn mission, but weather is a constant concern.  Currently, there is a 60% change of bad weather that could prevent tonight's Dragon launch atop a Falcon 9 rocket from NASA's Kennedy Space Center Pad 39A at Cape Canaveral, Florida. Liftoff is scheduled for 3:38 a.m. EDT (0738 GMT). SpaceX is also watching the weather forecasts for landing day, about five days from now, to ensure the weather in the Atlantic Ocean or Gulf of Mexico is calm enough for spacecraft splashdown and recovery. A live SpaceX webcast will begin at 12:05 a.m. EDT (0405 GMT). You can watch the Polaris Dawn launch live on our YouTube channel, courtesy of SpaceX, which is airing the launch on X. "Launch is currently go for early tomorrow morning," SpaceX CEO Elon Musk wrote on X. Launch is currently go for early tomorrow morning https://t.co/rwoYKFTef3September 10, 2024  SpaceX is now targeting an early morning launch on Sept. 10 for the historic Polaris Dawn mission. The company will attempt to launch Polaris Dawn early on Tuesday (Sept. 10) during a four-hour launch window that opens at at 3:38 a.m. ET (0738 GMT). Backup launch times are set for 5:23 a.m. ET (0923 GMT) and 7:09 a.m. ET (1109 GMT). Additional launch opportunities are available on Wednesday (Sept. 11) at the same times, according to SpaceX, should weather become an issue as it has with previous launch attempts. "Weather is currently 40% favorable for liftoff, and conditions at the possible splashdown sites for Dragon's return to Earth remain a watch item," SpaceX posted on X (formerly Twitter). Read more: SpaceX to launch private Polaris Dawn spacewalk mission tonight on farthest human spaceflight since Apollo SpaceX says it is currently in a holding pattern due to weather for the launch of the private Polaris Dawn mission.  "Latest forecasts continue to show unfavorable weather conditions in the areas along Florida’s coast where Dragon would splash down upon returning from space," SpaceX wrote on X Thursday night (Aug. 29). "Once teams identify the next best opportunity for launch and return of the Polaris Dawn mission, we’ll provide an update. Falcon 9 and Dragon remain healthy and vertical on the pad at 39A." Meanwhile, the FAA is investigating the landing failure of a different Falcon 9 rocket launch launched a set of Starlink satellites into orbit. That booster, which originally launched Polaris Dawn commander Jared Isaacman and a crew of 3 others to space in 2021's Inspiration4 mission, caught fire and toppled over while landing on a drone ship at sea on Aug. 28.  The four astronauts of SpaceX's private Polaris Dawn mission financed by American billionaire Jared Isaacman are taking delays to their launch well as they await launch. The mission was initially slated to launch Aug. 26, but was delayed two days to Aug. 28 due to technical issues, and then postponed to no earlier than Friday, Aug. 30, due to splashdown weather concerns for the end of the mission.  "Our launch criteria are heavily constrained by forecasted splashdown weather conditions. With no ISS rendezvous and limited life support consumables, we must be absolutely sure of reentry weather before launching. As of now, conditions are not favorable tonight or tomorrow, so we'll assess day by day," Isaacman wrote on X late Tuesday (Aug. 27).  "Sometimes, the hardest journeys require the most patience, and we’re ready to wait for the right moment. We know many have traveled to see the launch, and we’re grateful for your support." "Great summary of where we’re at, weather is going to be a challenge given launch and return requirements," Polaris Dawn mission specialist Sarah Gillis added. "Scrubbing for the next few launch opportunities, but ready to go once a weather window opens!" "It can be challenging at times when you’re building up to game day, but we proceed with cautious paranoia to ensure we mitigate risk," Polaris Dawn pilot Scott "Kidd" Poteet added. "In the big scheme of things, mission success will be that much sweeter for the entire Polaris Program [and] SpaceX team." Even SpaceX CEO Elon Musk weighed in, given the audacious goals of Polaris Dawn to attempt the world's first private spacewalk and the highest human spaceflight since NASA's Apollo missions.  "An incredible amount of work has gone into this historic mission by an amazing team," Musk wrote on Aug. 26 after the earlier delays. "We are triple-checking everything to make sure there is nothing more we can do to improve crew safety."  Polaris Dawn will have to wait a few more days at least before launching on the program's pioneering mission. Liftoff had been set for early Wednesday morning, Aug. 28, at 3:38 a.m. EDT (0738 GMT), but late in the evening Tuesday, SpaceX posted on X, formerly Twitter, that weather conditions at Dragon's recovery zones were unfavorable enough to delay the mission.  "Due to unfavorable weather forecasted in Dragon’s splashdown areas off the coast of Florida, we are now standing down from tonight and tomorrow’s Falcon 9 launch opportunities of Polaris Dawn. Teams will continue to monitor weather for favorable launch and return conditions," the post reads. In a repost, Polaris Dawn commander Jared Isaacman added some clarification, and stressed safety in moving forward with their mssion, "With no ISS rendezvous and limited life support consumables, we must be absolutely sure of reentry weather before launching. As of now, conditions are not favorable tonight or tomorrow, so we’ll assess day by day." Our launch criteria are heavily constrained by forecasted splashdown weather conditions. With no ISS rendezvous and limited life support consumables, we must be absolutely sure of reentry weather before launching. As of now, conditions are not favorable tonight or tomorrow, so… https://t.co/Zpd3pY5kNFAugust 28, 2024  SpaceX's Falcon 9 rocket is once again upright and in launch position atop Pad 39A for the planned Aug. 28 launch of the private Polaris Dawn spacewalk mission. Liftoff is on track for for 3:38 a.m. EDT (0738 GMT) after two days of delay this week.  "Falcon 9 and Dragon are vertical on pad 39A ahead of flight. Weather is 85% favorable for liftoff and teams are keeping an eye on recovery weather," SpaceX wrote on X (formerly Twitter).  SpaceX's livestream on X will begin at about 12 a.m. EDT (0400 GMT) and be simulcast on Space.com. Falcon 9 and Dragon are vertical on pad 39A ahead of flight. Weather is 85% favorable for liftoff and teams are keeping an eye on recovery weather → https://t.co/WpSw0gzeT0 pic.twitter.com/QXpInu1oFOAugust 27, 2024  The launch of SpaceX's Polaris Dawn astronaut mission has been delayed by at least 24 hours, to no earlier than 3:38 a.m. EDT (0738 GMT) on Wednesday (Aug. 28). SpaceX wants more time to study a helium leak associated with a "quick disconnect umbilical," an interface connecting the mission's Falcon 9 rocket to the launch tower.  Read more in our delay story.   SpaceX has given the "GO" for its private Polaris Dawn astronaut launch and spacewalk mission for Tuesday, Aug. 27, at 3:38 a.m. EDT (0738 GMT).  Over the weekend, SpaceX rolled its Falcon 9 rocket and Crew Dragon Resilience out to Pad 39A of NASA's Kennedy Space Center in Florida. The four-person Polaris Dawn crew performed full launch day dress rehearsal, with SpaceX capping the weekend with a successful static fire test of the Falcon 9 rocket's nine first-stage engines, a typical prelaunch test for the company.  "The Polaris Program mission readiness review just finished and we are currently go for launch in just over 24 hours," SpaceX CEO Elon Musk wrote on X (formerly Twitter). "Crew safety is absolutely paramount and this mission carries more risk than usual, as it will be the furthest humans have traveled from Earth since Apollo and the first commercial spacewalk! If any concerns arise, the launch will be postponed until those concerns are addressed."  SpaceX has released a new computer animation of what the Polaris Dawn private spacwalk will look like next week when Jared Isaacman opens the Dragon capsule hatch.  The rendering shows what appears to be handrails extending out from the Dragon hatch, which Isaacman can use to help stand up with most of his body outside of the spacecraft. The depiction shows the Dragon crewmember with their feet still inside the capsule, likely strapped into a stabilization or mobility aid, which SpaceX and the Polaris Dawn crew have worked to develop over the last two years. You can see the rendering here: The @PolarisProgram’s Polaris Dawn mission will be the first crew to perform a spacewalk from Dragon, fly higher in Earth’s orbit than anyone since the Apollo program, test laser-based @Starlink communications, and conduct research to help provide insight on human health during… pic.twitter.com/RW387QWShYAugust 22, 2024 "The rendering gives a solid sense of what it’ll be like," Isaacman wrote on X (formerly Twitter. "Dragon’s forward hatch should generally point towards Earth. The Dracos near the forward bulkhead will be disabled & as we cycle crew members between EV1/EV2, we’ll have opportunities to correct attitude or null rotation."  SpaceX has delayed the launch of the private Polaris Dawn spaceflight by at least 24 hours to allow more time for final preflight checks. The launch of Polaris Dawn, a private mission backed by American billionaire Jared Isaacman, is now scheduled to launch no earlier than Tuesday, Aug. 27, at 3:38 a.m. EDT (0738 GMT).  "Targeting Tuesday, August 27 for launch of Polaris Dawn, the first of the Polaris Program's three human spaceflight missions designed to advance the future of spaceflight," SpaceX wrote in an update on X (formerly Twitter) late Aug. 21. "The new date allows additional time for teams to complete preflight checkouts ahead of next week’s launch."  The Polaris Dawn mission is now scheduled to launch on Aug. 27, a day later than originally planned.  "The new date allows additional time for teams to complete preflight checkouts ahead of next week’s launch," SpaceX wrote in a post on X.  "We will happily take an extra day to ensure readiness," mission commander Jared Isaacman wrote in a post on X.  As the Polaris Dawn crew prepares for their private launch to space on Aug. 26 with SpaceX, the mission's fundraising arm is in full swing for its chosen nonprofit St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, which studies and treats cancer in children.  Polaris Dawn commander Jared Isaacman said his first spaceflight, 2021's Inspiration4, "raised over $250 million for them. We've raised millions since with Polaris Dawn, and will continue to do so throughout the duration of the Polaris program." In conjunction with the efforts of Isaacman and the Polaris Dawn crew, the mission has found partners to help raise more funds for St. Jude.  Doritos has crafted a new Zero Gravity Cool Ranch chip designed for safe snacking in weightlessness and offering the chips and space-flown tins a s prizes as part of its fundraising project, which you can find at https://doritos.experience.stjude.org/. So far, the project has raised more than $538,000 and is nearing its goal of $585,000. Meanwhile, luxury watch maker IWC Schaffhausen has donated a Pilot’s Watch Chronograph Edition "Polaris Dawn" watch, which will be worn on the flight and be auctioned off to benefit St. Jude after the flight.  Kisses from Space by Anna Menon, Keri Vesak, $19.99 now $15.99 at Amazon. SpaceX lead operations engineer Anna Menon's Kisses From Space, published by Random House, will fly to space with Menon on the Polaris Dawn mission. Proceeds from the book will help support St. Jude Children's Research Hospital. Mission specialist Anna Menon also wrote a children's book, called "Kisses from Space," that she'll read during the flight, with proceeds from the book's sale going to St. Jude.   The four private astronauts of SpaceX's Polaris Dawn mission are a week away from launch after two years of training for a mission that, they hope, will include the world's first private spacewalk.  American billionaire Jared Isaacman, who previously backed his private Inspiration4 spaceflight with SpaceX, will command the Polaris Dawn mission, the first of three new spaceflights he's purchased from SpaceX.  Isaacman, pilot Scott "Kidd" Poteet, and mission specialists Sarah Gillis and Anna Menon, both Lead Space Operations Engineers at SpaceX, arrived at their launch site at NASA's Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida on Aug. 19. Liftoff is set for Aug. 26 at 3:38 a.m. EDT (0738 GMT).  The mission, announced in 2022, will test new spacesuits for SpaceX during a planned 2-hour spacewalk during the five-day mission. On Aug. 19, the crew spoke with reporters about their upcoming mission.  Read all about it in our wrap story here from Space.com's Josh Dinner.  The Polaris Dawn will have some brand new snacks in space when they launch on SpaceX's Crew Dragon Resilience on Aug. 26.  Doritos is flying a brand-new type of safe-for-space Zero Gravity Cool Ranch Doritos chips during the private spaceflight. The limited-edition flavor is available for sale online and contains an oil-based coating to keep Doritos' classic powdered topping from floating away in weightlessness.  "The limitless possibilities of space inspired us to push the boundaries of what's possible," said Chris Bellinger, chief creative officer of PepsiCo Foods North America, in a statement. "This mission is a testament to our commitment to delivering bold experiences and flavors, even in the most unexpected places." You can read more about the new space Doritos in our full story by Robert Pearlman of collectSPACE.com.  SpaceX launches 5 giant BlueBird smartphone satellites for AST SpaceMobile, lands rocket (video) NASA astronaut, 2 cosmonauts arrive at ISS aboard Russian Soyuz capsule (video) SpaceX's private Polaris Dawn astronauts beam photos to Earth using Starlink satellites Breaking space news, the latest updates on rocket launches, skywatching events and more! Space is part of Future US Inc, an international media group and leading digital publisher. Visit our corporate site. ©
Future US, Inc. Full 7th Floor, 130 West 42nd Street,
New York,
NY 10036. 