Title: Famous Rococo Paintings – The Best Art of the French Rococo Era

Luxury, decadence, theatricality– these are a few words that come to mind when thinking back to the artwork that came out of the Rococo period. The Rococo movement was an opulent visual movement that was established in c. 1720 Paris. The magnificent paintings from this period were characterized by their ornamental and decorative style. If you are interested in getting a glimpse of the spectacular art that came out of the Rococo movement, continue reading to reveal our top 10 most famous Rococo paintings as we delve into the notable works from the 18th century! Table of Contents     The Rococo period spanned the majority of the 18th century. It originated in Paris c. 1720 and soon spread throughout France and other parts of Europe including Italy, Germany, Russia, and Austria. The Rococo movement began as a reaction to the more formal grandeur and heaviness of the Baroque style that preceded it, by contrasting it with delicate lightness and whimsy. King Louis XV was considered a “perpetual adolescent”, which gives you an idea of why the playful nature of the French Rococo was so suitable for his reign.  Portrait of Louis XV (1719) by Jean Ranc; Jean Ranc, Public domain, via Wikimedia Commons  The Rococo movement became synonymous with the compelling Madame de Pompadour, the new King XV’s mistress. Madame de Pompadour embodied the essence of the Rococo style, and she became associated with the movement as she had authority over all things stylish. She was a major patron of the movement and she commissioned to have many of her portraits done in the Rococo style. The word “Rococo” is derived from the French word “rocaille”, meaning pebble or rock, and it refers to the stones and shells that were used to decorate fountains or the interiors of grottoes since the Renaissance. The term “rocaille” was used to describe the decorative and ornamental style that was featured in Rococo paintings.  The Pre-Arranged Flight (c. 1772-1773) by Jean-Honore Fragonard; Jean-Honoré Fragonard, Public domain, via Wikimedia Commons The Rococo artists of this period focused on light and pastels in their candy-colored scenes of playful courtship and leisure that captured a more delicate and feminine essence. The Rococo movement was defined by its use of natural motifs, curving lines, soft colors, and themes regarding nature, playfulness, lighthearted amusement, youth, and love. The Rococo art paintings were characterized by their intricate ornamentation, exuberant decoration, and asymmetrical designs. Rococo artwork exaggerated the principles of theatricality and illusion.     The Rococo movement spanned across the majority of the 18th century, originating in Paris and spreading across various parts of Europe. During this time, the Rococo artists that contributed to the movement left a bountiful collection of Rococo art paintings that were extravagant, elegant, and opulent; paintings that went on to inspire artists that followed and continue to be celebrated to this day. Here is our selection of the top 10 most famous Rococo paintings.   Jean-Antoine Watteau is largely regarded as the founder of the Rococo style painting. Incorporating influences from the Venetian Renaissance masters such as Paolo Veronese and Titian; and the Flemish giant Peter Paul Rubens, Watteau developed compositions that were dynamic in brilliantly expressive colors. Watteau presented an untamed and idyllic depiction of nature. Also known as the “Pilgrimage to the Isle of Cythera”, this painting is regarded as one of Watteau’s most famous Rococo paintings.  The Embarkation for Cythera (1717) by Jean-Antoine Watteau; Jean-Antoine Watteau, Public domain, via Wikimedia Commons  The Embarkation for Cythera merges a lush landscape that is reminiscent of the Renaissance-style with a symbolic scene where a group of couples is either set out for or returning from Cythera, a little Greek island close to the site in mythology where Aphrodite, the Goddess of love, was born. In the foreground, there are three couples that each represent a separate stage of courtship. In the sky, three cupids are flying, which reflects the amorous suggestions of the island. His painting was accepted by the Royal Academy of Painting and Sculpture which brought recognition to the newly formed genre and established the Rococo style. This introduced the fête galante, courtship painting, which involved Watteau’s signature melding of fantasy and reality in both the setting and costume in his paintings, as well as the unspecified subject matter of his paintings. The characteristics Watteau developed in his Rococo-style paintings went on to inspire artists such as François Boucher and Jean-Honoré Fragonard, who later became Rococo giants.   In terms of Italian cityscape paintings, there is no one quite like Giovanni Antonio Canal who famously went by the name Canaletto. The Entrance to the Grand Canal is regarded as his most famous painting, which depicts the waterway entrance that leads into Venice with gondoliers maneuvering their passengers across the canvas. Venice at the time was a popular artistic haven. On the left of the painting, the large church depicted is the Basilica of Santa Maria della Salute.  The Entrance to the Grand Canal (c. 1730) by Canaletto; Canaletto, Public domain, via Wikimedia Commons Canaletto’s painting featured the typical asymmetrical design of Rococo art. The asymmetrical positioning of the gondoliers indicates movement in the painting, as three of them extend upwards drawing your eye into the distance. The delicate work of local colors creates a golden hue that suggests he was capturing the essence of an idyllic scene. Canaletto’s intricate depiction of light captured the work of the sun and shadows on the beautiful Venetian architecture. This style of landscape, the Arcadian landscape, heavily inspired the Rococo style of painting.  Canaletto’s The Entrance to the Grand Canal is considered one of the most famous Rococo paintings made outside the region of France in the 1700s. Canaletto mastered painting from nature and expertly conveyed the atmosphere he was trying to capture. His work has maintained its acclaim and influence, in 2017 David Bickerstaff featured it in his film Canaletto and the Art of Venice.    In contrast to the extravagant and extensive scenes often associated with Rococo artwork, Jean-Baptiste-Siméon Chardin’s paintings depicted a seemingly simple perspective despite him being a pioneer of the Rococo movement. Chardin’s well-known artworks focused on the playful disposition of children; in fact, one of his most notable pieces Soap Bubbles depicted two children playing. In this painting, he depicted a child blowing bubbles, whilst a friend watched from behind. The colors in Soap Bubbles are quite muted, showcasing rich browns and black. These colors highlight the contrast of the boy’s glowing face and hands, which invite you to focus on what the boy is doing, as the viewer you become immersed, much like the boy, in the childhood act of blowing bubbles. Chardin’s brushwork is thick and textured, mimicking the tactile textures of fabric, skin, and stone. This painting demonstrates the feeling of childhood and the fleeting joy of idle play.  Soap Bubbles (c. 1733 – 1734) by Jean-Baptiste-Siméon Chardin; Jean-Baptiste-Siméon Chardin, Public domain, via Wikimedia Commons Following the observations of many critics and art historians, the painting seems to depict the innocence of childhood and the ease of amusement, rather than anything deeply symbolic. However, some see the bubble as an allusive symbol of life’s impermanence. The painting served as Chardin’s distinct contribution to the Rococo movement, with his realistic scenes establishing a genre that depicted children at play, still lifes, and domestic scenes that all reflected the leisurely pastimes that were typical of the Rococo movement. Chardin skillfully portrayed the everyday aesthetic of the French middle-class and developed a strong following that reached iconic figures such as Vincent Van Gogh, Paul Cézanne, and Édouard Manet.   François Boucher’s La Toilette de Vénus depicts Madame de Pompadour in the nude as Venus, the classical Goddess of beauty and love. The painting exudes overt theatricality with Boucher’s portrayal of voluptuous flesh, the asymmetrical spread of furniture, luxuriant fabrics, pearls, and flowers. La Toilette de Vénus was originally painted to decorate Madame de Pompadour’s luxury suite of three rooms that made up her bathing apartments at her Château de Bellevue. Both Boucher and Madame de Pompadour became synonymous with the Rococo movement.  La Toilette de Vénus (1751) by François Boucher; François Boucher, CC0, via Wikimedia Commons Two white doves and three cherubs tend to the figure of Venus as she lounges on a seat framed in gold. The blue drapes that glisten with the light and shadow are partially open to a view of an alluring garden, which creates a captivating sense of leisure. Depicting Madame de Pompadour as Venus idealizes her and surrounding her figure with ornate decorations enhances the overall feel of luxury. Boucher’s sensual portrayals of the social elite and notable citizens came to form part of his own defined pictorial brand. Madame de Pompadour became Boucher’s most notable patron until she died in 1764. La Toilette de Vénus was one of the many portraits she had commissioned. Boucher masterfully presented the conflation of theatricality and performed identities with the real lived identities of his subjects. Demonstrating the art of appearance that still represented his subject’s true identity. Boucher’s ability to captivatingly depict his subjects led to him becoming known as one of the most famous Rococo artists in portraiture.   Allegory of the Planets and Continents is one of Giovanni Battista Tiepolo’s most famous paintings and contributions to Italian Rococo, which was based on French Rococo style and an airier expression of the preceding Baroque style. Allegory of the Planets and Continents portrays an exuberant arrangement of heavenly figures that together represent the various planets and Earth’s continents. The painting was created to be hung on the ceiling of the staircase at the Würzburg Residence in Germany for Carl Phillip von Grieffenklau, the prince-bishop.  Allegory of the Planets and Continents (1752) by Giovanni Battista Tiepolo; Giovanni Battista Tiepolo, Public domain, via Wikimedia Commons Tiepolo’s spectacularly festive portrayal of the sun’s movement through the sky demonstrates a splendor of color, light, and swirling patterns. To the left of the center, you can see Apollo, the Greek God of the sun, who is illuminated from behind by a shining orb as he calls to the sun horses that stand to his right. The remaining Gods symbolize the planets swirling around Apollo, the sun. The border features many figures pointing towards the painting’s center as if to indicate that inward lies divinity. The figures represent people of Africa, America, Asia, and Europe. The large fresco was composed so that individual sections of the painting could be viewed separately at specific stopping places. Tiepolo made it seem as if the perspective would adjust to the viewer’s position. Tiepolo’s genius could be witnessed in the arrangement of his pastels, he would create tension in the scene that would highlight the dramatic poses and narrative movement of his figures to develop a lively effect. With his imagination, he created a theatrical language to convey ancient narratives and sacred legends. It was Tiepolo’s genius that inspired artists such as Francisco Goya.   François Boucher’s exquisite Portrait of Madame de Pompadour depicted the mistress of King Louis XV. Madame de Pompadour embodied the essence of the Rococo style, and she became associated with the movement as she had authority over all things stylish. This was another portrait by Boucher that she had commissioned. Boucher’s portrait aptly portrayed her as lavish, decadent, and fashionably elegant. Boucher’s full-sized portrait depicted Madame de Pompadour reclining in her luxuriant green silk gown, patterned with pink roses. Extravagant tones of gold coat the painting, with the golden brocades framing the room and an intricate golden cartel clock above the fireplace providing sumptuous detail to the painting.  Portrait of Madame de Pompadour (1756) by François Boucher; François Boucher, Public domain, via Wikimedia Commons The painting is rich in symbolism with details such as a full bookcase with several books littered across the floor, and the lyre-shaped clock adorned with laurels. Symbolizing her love of poetry, music, and literature. The painting conveys pleasurable leisure and confidence, yet it is still able to demonstrate the weight of her intellectual influence with a quill and open book in hand. Madame de Pompadour’s pose, with a turned gaze to her left, represented deep philosophical thought. Boucher’s work on Portrait of Madame de Pompadour has served as a somewhat social iconography, with each factor being chosen carefully and unified stylistically to portray an ideal image. Boucher’s portrayals of Madame de Pompadour demonstrated the quintessential Rococo style painting. Madame de Pompadour propelled the Rococo movement forward due to her influence.    Jean-Honoré Fragonard developed a distinct style during the French Rococo period. He often used colors that were more vibrant in comparison to his counterparts, not only that but his paintings, in general, differed quite a bit from the Rococo artwork that came out of the early 18th century. One of his famous Rococo paintings is titled The Bathers, which depicts eight women lightheartedly bathing in the sun. The trees surrounding the women frame their bodies as they are all arranged in various poses, each expressing unique personalities and characteristics.  The Bathers (1765) by Jean-Honoré Fragonard; Jean-Honoré Fragonard, Public domain, via Wikimedia Commons The bathing scene was popular during the Rococo period. It was often used as a means to show off the Rococo artists’ skills as they had to paint the nude figures in a variety of positions from various angles, and of course, the provocative subject matter edged towards the titillating. In The Bathers, there was a lightness about the palette and the theme, as the lighter tones of colors used were suited to expressing the gentleness and innocence of the women. Fragonard’s brushwork was palpable and loose which provided a sense of fluidity that contributed to the liveliness of the Rococo artwork. The Bathers was one of the last few of Fragonard’s Rococo art paintings to be publicly displayed and exhibited, in 1767 he began to solely paint for private clients. Fragonard was one of the Rococo artists at the epicenter of the movement, he contributed well over 500 spectacular paintings to the movement documenting the decadence of the times and illustrating carefree amusement and images of splendor.      The Swing is another example of Jean-Honoré Fragonard’s masterful work. The Rococo artwork depicts a graceful young woman who is swinging playfully from the branch of a tree as a young man looks to her from below and another man behind her stands in the shadows pulling her swing by rope. The man in front of her is positioned in such a way that he would have a view underneath her dress, which exemplified the Hedonism of the Rococo era, which was often present in Fragonard’s artwork. The Swing is the quintessential Rococo style painting, with Fragonard’s signature deft brushwork, soft colors and lighting, and frivolously light-hearted themes. The young woman’s frothy pink dress billows as she is poised in mid-air, exposing her legs to the man blushing below. Tantalizingly, she kicks off her she toward the statue of cupid, the God of love and desire. At the time, the shoeless foot of a woman was symbolic of nudity. In a presumed ploy to be ironic, Fragonard clad the woman in a bergère hat, shepherdess hat, which symbolized purity and virtue.  The Happy Accidents of the Swing (1767) by Jean-Honoré Fragonard; Jean-Honoré Fragonard, Public domain, via Wikimedia Commons The Swing is recognized as one of the most famous artworks from the Rococo era. The asymmetrical composition, the lush scenery, playfulness, nonchalance, and layered eroticism exemplified the characteristics of the Rococo style. The Swing has cemented its place as a cultural and artistic icon. There have been several nods made to this ever-inspiring piece, with notable mentions in popular culture such as the Disney film Frozen, where it is seen sitting in an art gallery, or when it was referenced by the contemporary artists’ Kent Monkman and Yinka Shonibare in their work, or as part of Larry Moss’ 3D art installation at the Phelps Art Center.   The Blue Boy is considered one of Thomas Gainsborough’s most famous Rococo paintings. It depicts a portrait of a boy in a blue uniform, as a costume study. The rosy-cheeked young boy is elegantly dressed in a detailed costume against a turbulent landscape Gainsborough was influenced by the French Rococo style through his learnings at the St. Martin’s Lane Academy which inspired his exploration of the dynamics between people and their environments. With this interest, he depicted many portraits of extravagantly dressed figures in lush outdoor scenes. The painting was influenced by Anthony van Dyck and demonstrated Gainsborough’s first attempt at creating a van Dyck-style costume with the boy’s azure outfit.  Jonathan Buttall (The Blue Boy) (c. 1770) by Thomas Gainsborough; Thomas Gainsborough, Public domain, via Wikimedia Commons Gainsborough creates a contrast between the rustic background and the delicate figure. The life-sized portrait illustrates exceptional technical skill and reflects his capable undertaking of the Rococo style of merging fantasy and reality. The fine and slashed layered brushwork had intricate tints of turquoise, lapis lazuli, cobalt, indigo, and slate– making the blue electric against the stormy landscape scene. The Blue Boy was Gainsborough’s masterpiece. It challenged the traditional assumptions around aesthetics since blue was traditionally considered as only a background element, yet Gainsborough featured it as his primary color. The painting reflected the traditions of the Rococo style, but it also incorporated innovative features of realism such as the tightly laced buttons. The painting was an immediate success. From its debut to the present day, the painting remains an inspirational piece of work, having inspired everything from songs such as Blue Boy Blues by Cole Porter to one of the costumes of the main character Django in Quentin Tarantino’s film Django Unchained.   Élisabeth Louise Vigée Le Brun was one of the prolific painters of her time. Although some of Le Brun’s paintings incorporated elements of the Neoclassical style, her portraits were largely considered Rococo-style paintings. She was considered one of the more notable Rococo artists for a number of reasons; apart from her immense skills, she was Marie Antoinette’s lead portrait artist. In Self-Portrait with Straw Hat, she painted a self-portrait where she managed to capture both casual and aristocratic elegance when depicting her own artistic expertise. This painting brilliantly shows off elements of the French Rococo style; the loose brushstrokes, which are particularly evident when you look at her hair; the pastel colors; and her youthful whimsical facial expression.  Self-Portrait with Straw Hat (after 1782) by Élisabeth Louise Vigée Le Brun; Elisabeth Louise Vigée-LeBrun, Public domain, via Wikimedia Commons Her face is shadowed softly which reveals her confident gaze directed at the viewer. Le Brun has accomplished a deliberate nonchalance in her painting, as she portrayed herself as a serious artist. Her painting was influenced by Le Chapeau de Paille by Peter Paul Rubens. During this time, women artists were mainly limited to painting portraits. Le Brun produced more than 220 landscape paintings and 660 portraits during her time, with some of her paintings exhibited in world-renowned museums across the globe. She was one of the most renowned of the women Rococo artists. Le Brun battled many barriers by pursuing a career dominated by men, yet she prevailed and was one of the four women that were officially accepted in the Royal Academy of Fine Arts, helping her become one of the first women to gain international acclaim.   The famous Rococo paintings that were discussed in this article continue to hold significance to this day. While the list shows our selection of the top 10 most famous Rococo paintings, there are countless paintings from this movement that are worth looking at. If you enjoyed this article, we think you might enjoy our other work and we encourage you to explore more of our website!   Take a look at our Rococo painting webstory here!       The Rococo period was an opulent visual movement that was established in c. 1720 Paris and spread throughout France and other parts of Europe including Italy, Germany, Russia, and Austria. The Rococo artists of this period focused on attention to detail, with its candy-colored scenes of playful courtship and extreme leisure. The movement spanned the majority of the 18th century. The word Rococo is derived from the French word rocaille, meaning pebble or rock, and it refers to the stones and shells that were used to decorate the interiors of grottoes since the Renaissance. The term “rocaille” was used to describe the decorative and ornamental style that was featured in Rococo paintings.   The Rococo movement began as a reaction to the more formal grandeur and heaviness of the Baroque style that preceded it, by contrasting it with delicate lightness and whimsy. King Louis XV was considered a “perpetual adolescent”, which is why the playful nature of the French Rococo was so suitable for his reign. The Rococo movement became synonymous with the compelling Madame de Pompadour, the new King XV’s mistress. Madame de Pompadour embodied the essence of the Rococo style, and she became associated with the movement as she had authority over all things stylish and she was a notable patron of the movement.   The Rococo movement was defined by its use of natural motifs, curving lines, soft and pastel colors, and themes regarding nature, playfulness, lighthearted amusement, youth, and love. The Rococo art paintings were characterized by their intricate ornamentation, exuberant decoration, and asymmetrical designs. Rococo artwork exaggerated the principles of theatricality and illusion.   Isabella studied at the University of Cape Town in South Africa and graduated with a Bachelor of Arts majoring in English Literature & Language and Psychology. Throughout her undergraduate years, she took Art History as an additional subject and absolutely loved it. Building on from her art history knowledge that began in high school, art has always been a particular area of fascination for her. From learning about artworks previously unknown to her, or sharpening her existing understanding of specific works, the ability to continue learning within this interesting sphere excites her greatly. Her focal points of interest in art history encompass profiling specific artists and art movements, as it is these areas where she is able to really dig deep into the rich narrative of the art world. Additionally, she particularly enjoys exploring the different artistic styles of the 20th century, as well as the important impact that female artists have had on the development of art history. Learn more about Isabella Meyer and the Art in Context Team. Isabella, Meyer, “Famous Rococo Paintings – The Best Art of the French Rococo Era.” Art in Context. November 16, 2021. URL: https://artincontext.org/famous-rococo-paintings/ Meyer, I. (2021, 16 November). Famous Rococo Paintings – The Best Art of the French Rococo Era. Art in Context. https://artincontext.org/famous-rococo-paintings/ Meyer, Isabella. “Famous Rococo Paintings – The Best Art of the French Rococo Era.” Art in Context, November 16, 2021. https://artincontext.org/famous-rococo-paintings/. Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked * Comment * Name * Email * Website  Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.    About Us Art in Context is your holistic art encyclopedia. We offer you extensive information about the history of art, analyses of famous artworks, artist biopics, information on architecture, literature, photography, painting, and drawing. About | Team Most Popular Posts   Readers Favorites Important Tools About © 2024 Faessler Media Ltd. | UID: CHE-318.069.932 | Langruetistrasse 115, CH-8635 Duernten, Switzerland | Phone: +41 55 535 05 84 Discover the most famous artists, paintings, sculptors…in all of history!  Discover the most famous artists, paintings, sculptors!