Title: SpaceX launches 21 Starlink satellites from California's Vandenberg Space Force Base, lands rocket (video)

SpaceX has sent more than 90 missions to space this year. 
When you purchase through links on our site, we may earn an affiliate commission. Here’s how it works.
 SpaceX launched a new batch of Starlink satellites into orbit from its West Coast launch site on Thursday (Sept. 12). A Falcon 9 rocket carrying 21 Starlink internet satellites soared into space from Vandenberg Space Force Base in California at 9:45 p.m. EDT (0145 GMT Friday, Sept. 13 or 6:45 p.m. local time). The first stage for the SpaceX booster than landed on the company drone ship "Of Course I Still Love You" in the Pacific Ocean about eight minutes after launch.  Related: Starlink satellite train: How to see and track it in the night sky It was the 18th time this first-stage booster has flown to space and back again, with 11 of those missions alone supporting previous Starlink deployments, according to SpaceX records.  Some other SpaceX missions for this booster have included a couple of Transporter launches, which send satellites for multiple clients to space at the same time, as well as national security missions for the National Reconnaissance Office.  — SpaceX Falcon 9 rocket ties 19 flight-record with launch from California (video) — 8 ways that SpaceX has transformed spaceflight — SpaceX launches Crew-8 astronaut mission to International Space Station for NASA (video) More than 6,300 Starlink satellites are operational in orbit, according to Jonathan McDowell, an astronomer at the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics who also keeps track of space launches. Breaking space news, the latest updates on rocket launches, skywatching events and more! SpaceX has been launching frequently in recent days, including sending five BlueBird smartphone satellites to orbit for AST SpaceMobile earlier in the day on Wednesday, and the crewed Polaris Dawn private mission on Tuesday (Sept. 10). SpaceX has launched more than 90 missions to space in 2024, according to media reports. Join our Space Forums to keep talking space on the latest missions, night sky and more! And if you have a news tip, correction or comment, let us know at: community@space.com. Elizabeth Howell (she/her), Ph.D., is a staff writer in the spaceflight channel since 2022 covering diversity, education and gaming as well. She was contributing writer for Space.com for 10 years before joining full-time. Elizabeth's reporting includes multiple exclusives with the White House and Office of the Vice-President of the United States, an exclusive conversation with aspiring space tourist (and NSYNC bassist) Lance Bass, speaking several times with the International Space Station, witnessing five human spaceflight launches on two continents, flying parabolic, working inside a spacesuit, and participating in a simulated Mars mission. Her latest book, "Why Am I Taller?", is co-written with astronaut Dave Williams. Elizabeth holds a Ph.D. and M.Sc. in Space Studies from the University of North Dakota, a Bachelor of Journalism from Canada's Carleton University and a Bachelor of History from Canada's Athabasca University. Elizabeth is also a post-secondary instructor in communications and science at several institutions since 2015; her experience includes developing and teaching an astronomy course at Canada's Algonquin College (with Indigenous content as well) to more than 1,000 students since 2020. Elizabeth first got interested in space after watching the movie Apollo 13 in 1996, and still wants to be an astronaut someday. Mastodon: https://qoto.org/@howellspace Boeing’s Starliner astronauts speak publicly today for 1st time in 2 months: Watch it live SpaceX's Starship won't be licensed to fly again until late November, FAA says ESA's JUICE spacecraft confirmed Earth is habitable. Here's why Space is part of Future US Inc, an international media group and leading digital publisher. Visit our corporate site. ©
Future US, Inc. Full 7th Floor, 130 West 42nd Street,
New York,
NY 10036. 